KaydenML: Good morning.
Shariq Naiyer: Good morning, Kenan.
KaydenML: Good morning, Sharik.
KaydenML: Good morning, Will.
Will Corcoran: Morning, Al, how are you?
KaydenML: Doing good?
KaydenML: Good morning, Inuit.
unnawut: Morning!
Ladislaus: Hi, folks!
Will Corcoran: Anyways, listen.
Will Corcoran: I dropped the agenda in the chat, and… let's see here… I can share my screen.
Will Corcoran: If it's helpful to go over the… Project Board?
Will Corcoran: …
Will Corcoran: So…
Will Corcoran: Where do we want to dive in? … Designer.
Will Corcoran: Oh, either of you have…
Will Corcoran: updates on the, project board. I know you've been taking a look at it. There's…
Will Corcoran: been a lot of work that's been merged. Tama, also.
Will Corcoran: Do we just get an update on the specification?
Gajinder Singh: Right, so I'll just begin with some, …
Gajinder Singh: some of my views. So, our aim is that, by end of August, we are… we should be done on spec.
Gajinder Singh: And O's initial container PR was merged.
Gajinder Singh: And then, it is followed up by my straight transition function PR, which,
Gajinder Singh: Which, on which O, and … …
Gajinder Singh: and June and I, we basically had a discussion, and …
Gajinder Singh: It is… it looks mostly good, but we will definitely, you know.
Gajinder Singh: have a re-look. Basically, we'll iterate on it, and Toma, if you want to have a look at it, then we can… you can also have a look at it, and then maybe we can discuss it. There is some refinement that needs to be done in terms of some functions need to be defined.
Gajinder Singh: That have been left out, but most… but 98% of it is covered, right? So… so… so you will be able to… able to, …
Gajinder Singh: figure out the entire straight transition function. We can go through it if we want at this call.
Gajinder Singh: And, it has, … chaining and 3SF.
Gajinder Singh: As the features, one of the
Gajinder Singh: Key points, so do we want to go over it right now?
Thomas Coratger: Yeah, we can. Yeah.
Gajinder Singh: Alright, so….
Will Corcoran: And before you started, as you were giving that overview, before you went to… you're working on STF, what'd you mention O's working on?
Gajinder Singh: Yeah, so… so basically, … I'm not sure what I was working on, but we basically discussed,
Gajinder Singh: the SDF PR, and then I will be working on… further working on cons… … the FolkChoice PR, which, again, I will…
Gajinder Singh: be discussing with O, having some calls over it, so that we can finalize that.
Gajinder Singh: this is the plan, and on the Genesis tooling, what we realized while talking was that we actually don't need E12 generator, because
Gajinder Singh: Generating Genesis state is quite simple from the config itself, so each of the clients can generate the Genesis state from the config. So what we actually need is Ethereum Genesis.
Gajinder Singh: generator, which basically generates the client configs, and even on the client config, we'll generate just one kind of config, so that, you know, every other client can just consume it, because all the clients are starting from zero, so it doesn't make…
Gajinder Singh: any sense to have client-specific configs. So we can just do one config, and that becomes a standard for all of the clients.
Will Corcoran: Excellent. So, yeah, back to the SGF walkthrough, sounds great.
Gajinder Singh: Yeah, so… so just let me then continue with the overview plan. So the plan is that
Gajinder Singh: we have the tooling ready by 5th September in that sense, the Genesis tooling ready by 5th September, where we are able to generate the configs that we need.
Gajinder Singh: And, in the meantime, if, someone can, I think Toma or O can, generate, can work on the Python code.
Gajinder Singh: Then, if we have spec tests by 12 September.
Gajinder Singh: then we can get ready for interop by 19 September, basically pass all the spec tests by 19 September.
Gajinder Singh: So that… by 26th September, we… Can do a successful interop.
Gajinder Singh: For DevNet Zero, and then, …
Gajinder Singh: By 3rd October, we will… we should be able to have the tooling up by… up for…
Gajinder Singh: DevNet one, and in that tooling as well, what we only need is that
Gajinder Singh: a list of public-private key pairs for various validators, and again, we don't need the Genesis generator, because Genesis can be generated by the clients using those config files, so I will… I will think of
Gajinder Singh: The public-private key pairs as config files, so…
Gajinder Singh: So that is the deadline we have, and these are super strict deadlines, so that,
Gajinder Singh: In the interop, we can actually try for…
Gajinder Singh: actual client interop, and so 3rd September is also the…
Gajinder Singh: deadline to, to basically implement, all the specs that we need for DevNet 1.
Thomas Coratger: Yep, I will check that and let you know what I can do and what I cannot do, but I will definitely check that to start, …
Thomas Coratger: implementing the Python stuff.
Gajinder Singh: Right, cool. So with that, let's deep dive into this, STF spec.
Gajinder Singh: All right, I can't share why the participant is sharing. Also, generally, you know, my…
Gajinder Singh: Zoom dies when I try to share, so it would be better, …
Gajinder Singh: If you can directly share wealth.
Will Corcoran: Sure.
Will Corcoran: Yeah, you want to drop the link? Okay.
Gajinder Singh: Yep.
Gajinder Singh: Yeah, we can go to files.
Will Corcoran: Okay remind me, is my screen still actively shared? Yeah, it looks like it.
Will Corcoran: So you said you have files changed, okay.
Gajinder Singh: Right, so this is just the header that will generate, auto-generate. Let's go down.
Gajinder Singh: Right, so what I have mentioned in the first section is what are the… what are the features that we are going for, if you can scroll a little bit up.
Gajinder Singh: Right, so the features are chaining.
Gajinder Singh: … So let's scroll down.
Gajinder Singh: And then, 3SF Mini, justification and finalization. There will be, no, signatures, so basically it's empty signatures, there is no aggregation, there is round-robin proposals, and there are simplified validators.
Gajinder Singh: So that, basically, proposal and voting is a trusted process.
Gajinder Singh: Because there is… there are no signatures, and there is even no validator structure in the state as well. So there is no deposit activation, withdrawal, or slashing. So, actually, there is no validator cycle, and each validator has a weight of 1.
Gajinder Singh: And, yup.
Gajinder Singh: So, this is that the Genesis can be generated very easily.
Gajinder Singh: So, if we go to the Genesis part, so generating genesis requires
Gajinder Singh: just two config variables, which is genesisTime and num validators, and we have a very simplified Genesis generation function based on the lines of
Gajinder Singh: How because Beacon Genesis is generated, we basically set the genesis time and num validators in the state, as well as set the latest block header to an empty block header, but with the body root of the hash tree root of empty block body, which is how we do it in the beacon as well.
Gajinder Singh: And then the Genesis block is basically, you know, empty block with state routes set to the Genesis state.
Gajinder Singh: Now we can go to the straight transition function, and the notable thing in the straight transition function is that we are validating signatures outside
Gajinder Singh: Outside, so in the beacon straight transition, signature validation is inside the straight transition, but here we are getting a flag from outside the straight transition function that
Gajinder Singh: whether the signatures are valid or not, but other things are similar to how beacon-stray transition works. So basically, we have first process slots, which basically make sure that
Gajinder Singh: You are able, so we… we can, so we fast-forwarded state to the pre-slot of
Gajinder Singh: pre-state of this particular slot, which is what process slots does, and then we process the block.
Gajinder Singh: And the last step is basically validating that block straight root actually matches the straight root of the tree.
Gajinder Singh: So, when we look at process slots, it's very similar to how Yes, Silas?
Saulius Grigaitis | Grandine: Yeah, why the signature verification is outside?
Gajinder Singh: Yeah, basically, the signature verification is right now outside for the reasons, …
Gajinder Singh: So, first of all, we want state transition function to be light for the prover, so that, you know, there isn't much competition that is going on. And second.
Gajinder Singh: so the signatures for… for the attestations, it will be an aggregated signature. And, so basically, we need to sort of figure out whether we can run it inside
Gajinder Singh: the proverb itself?
Gajinder Singh: that particular verification, because it itself would be, some sort of a ZKVM running to verify the signature.
Gajinder Singh: So we need to figure that out… figure that part out.
Gajinder Singh: And, and basically, we want to keep the straight transition function light.
Gajinder Singh: In that manner.
Gajinder Singh: Generally, the way clients also implement it is that, you know, they just take the batch signatures in the block, they batch it up, and then they verify it.
Saulius Grigaitis | Grandine: Okay, so in some sense, it's kind of temporary outside, because it's still not sold.
Gajinder Singh: Sorry.
Saulius Grigaitis | Grandine: I mean, now it's temporary outside, because we just want to have a good proving time, right? And once it will be figured out how exactly the signature aggregation will be done, and how exactly the proving will be done, likely it will change.
Gajinder Singh: it… we can come back on this, but in my opinion, I think we should, …
Gajinder Singh: Just keep it outside the main state transition function, because…
Gajinder Singh: to keep it lighter, but again, I don't have…
Gajinder Singh: a very hard stance as of now, because I don't know that part totally fully, but especially for, blocks, signature validation, for example, you know, that this is now a signature hash verification that will happen.
Gajinder Singh: Hash signature verification that will happen, and it might be computationally intensive.
Gajinder Singh: So, whether it's good for ZKVM, whether it's light for ZKVM, or ZKVMs can do it in a vast manner that we can directly have it inside, …
Gajinder Singh: I'm not sure about that, but yes, we can definitely come back on this.
Saulius Grigaitis | Grandine: Thanks.
Gajinder Singh: Cool.
Will Corcoran: I think you're at the state route.
Gajinder Singh: Yeah, so this straight route validation is also similar to how it happens in the beacon. Now, coming to process slots, so… so the notable thing is that we… we basically don't have any process epoch over here, because there is no epoch transition, so we just process
Gajinder Singh: Each of the slots and move state slot forward, one by one.
Gajinder Singh: Till we reach the pre-strate of the current block.
Gajinder Singh: … So that is what is happening. Process slot is very similar to
Gajinder Singh: How it happens in, … in the beacon, …
Gajinder Singh: In the beacon consensus, so basically, if we have latest block had a, straight route as empty, so basically, we just fill it with the current… the current straight route, which is the start of
Gajinder Singh: Which is a pre-state.
Gajinder Singh: Oh… For this particular block.
Gajinder Singh: And, basically, this helps us establishing. So…
Gajinder Singh: So the next process is then we process the block, and in block, there are two things. We process the block header, and then we process the operations.
Gajinder Singh: Again, in, processing operations, we have, actually processing of the attestation slash votes.
Gajinder Singh: That is the only feature we have right now, and in process block header, we, for ex… we basically do similar things to…
Gajinder Singh: how Beacon, processors do process block header, so they… you will notice that, to verify the proposal index, we are just, doing the round-robin verification that, you know.
Gajinder Singh: Blog.slotmodulo state.config.numValidators, so that is… A notable change over here.
Gajinder Singh: And then the next line is where we establish the chaining, that block.parent root is hashtag root of state.latestBlockHeader. So this basic… so this establishes the chaining.
Gajinder Singh: And, coming to the 3SF-related changes. So, so here, in 3SF Mini, the Genesis happens at slot 1, but, we have…
Gajinder Singh: CAP Genesis block at slot 0 itself, and block 1 is the first block. In 3SF Mini, block 2 is the first block. So basically, you know, we did some modifications to bring it back
Gajinder Singh: to how we… how we do it, how we are used to right now. So if, so there is this special, treatment for that, if,
Gajinder Singh: If the state was at Genesis state, then basically we update it as justified.
Gajinder Singh: And let us finalize to the Genesis, Genesis route, which is block.parent route, because we have already established chaining at this point.
Gajinder Singh: And, then what we do is, basically, we…
Gajinder Singh: So, since the, now the parent, so now the voting can happen till the parent.
Gajinder Singh: So we basically update historical block hashes and justified slots, so just, to basically, you know.
Gajinder Singh: We push parent into historical block hashes, and justified slots, we either push true or false, depending upon
Gajinder Singh: whether the payment is Genesis or not, because Genesis is always justified and finalized.
Gajinder Singh: And then, again, just to, if there were any empty slots.
Gajinder Singh: Between, … between the parent block and this particular block, then we basically add empty hashes
Gajinder Singh: for those, for those empty slots in the historical block hash, and also push… push falls for… in that… in the justified slots, so that, to maintain the integrity of these two structures that we will use in 3SF Mini.
Gajinder Singh: And, then the last bit is to update the latest block header, which is how we do it in Beacon Consensus.
Gajinder Singh: Then we can move to process operations, which is where the main 3SF mini magic happens.
Gajinder Singh: Please scroll down.
Gajinder Singh: So, we… we process attestations, we process vote by vote. So, one thing to note is that, in 3SF Minis that, you know.
Gajinder Singh: the state has flattened, object of justifications. So there is a justification map in 3SF Mini, which basically is a map,
Gajinder Singh: Which is a map of, of the routes to…
Gajinder Singh: The array of validators that have justified it.
Gajinder Singh: Can you just scroll up, back up?
Gajinder Singh: So, justifications is a map, from root to the number… to the validators that are… that has justified it, and basically, we… we go over the latest vote of each of the validators, and
Gajinder Singh: see which routes they have justified, and then try to see whether something has been justified more than two-thirds… by the two-thirds of the validators, and we justify it, and then we try to finalize the source of it. So… so basically, then, this…
Gajinder Singh: in… in the current state, which is SSD state, we have this flattened into, …
Gajinder Singh: into two structures, which are justification routes and justification validators, I think.
Gajinder Singh: But…
Gajinder Singh: We reconstruct back an in-memory object over here, which is… which we… which we are saying are justifications, which map directly to…
Gajinder Singh: the 3SF Mini justifications, and then there is this helper function, getJustification, that does that. So for, … so that is the only notable thing, which, is sort of a departure from 3SF Mini.
Gajinder Singh: Then for each of the votes, we start processing it.
Gajinder Singh: Here again, there is an additional condition that I added based upon Zim experimentation, so that if the target is already, already justified as well, then you just don't process that vote. But apart from that, these are all,
Gajinder Singh: The similar… the rest of these conditions are similar. …
Gajinder Singh: And these conditions are basically whether you want to process this water or not.
Gajinder Singh: And, …
Gajinder Singh: And if, for example, this is… and there is a vote that is not in justifications map, then you basically populate
Gajinder Singh: That map.
Gajinder Singh: with, some, false entries, so that, you know, it's like initialization. And coming to the next step, which is line 254,
Gajinder Singh: Is where, basically.
Gajinder Singh: If the validator is voting for some target route, you basically flag it to true in your justifications map.
Gajinder Singh: And, then you count whether… how many, how many, validators are voting for that target route, and if…
Gajinder Singh: two-thirds of the validators are voting for the target route. Basically, you justify… that… Target?
Gajinder Singh: And, then you clear up your justifications map
Gajinder Singh: Basically, because we… because justifications map get re-flat… re-flattened back to…
Gajinder Singh: the SSD state, so you… you don't really want to…
Gajinder Singh: Crack justifications for the blocks that have already been justified.
Gajinder Singh: So we delete that, and then we try to see whether you can finalize the source, which is very similar to
Gajinder Singh: Which is exactly how it happens in the 3SF Mini. And in the end, then basically, you know, you re-flatten back these justifications to the SSG structures in the state.
Gajinder Singh: So, getJustification and setJustifications are the helper functions that we still need to define, and we'll fill it up, but rest of the straight transition function is done.
Thomas Coratger: amazing, like, small questions, not about the content, because I listened to your presentation, and I will go back to the MD stuff to really understand everything by myself, to compare with what I have understood there, but…
Thomas Coratger: First question, where are you, at the review process? Do you all clients agree on this, or is there some points where maybe there will be evolution and where you need to refine and…
Thomas Coratger: Have an agreement.
Thomas Coratger: And second question is, …
Thomas Coratger: did you generate it? Did you generate this code using Python and already tested it, or you just wrote that into…
Thomas Coratger: the MG stuff.
Gajinder Singh: Yeah, so, with regard to modifications, I don't think there are any modifications that will be required. We'll just need to add the definitions for get justification and set justification, so that, you know, we have all the helper functions available.
Gajinder Singh: So that, clients can then, …
Gajinder Singh: code it up, in the best, form that… that is suitable to their, you know, client language. But, apart from that, I think, everything is good. What I will also do is, I will…
Gajinder Singh: go and change a ZIM code on basis of this particular PR, and sort of…
Gajinder Singh: re-verify that in our code that, you know, everything is working good, because I made some departures from how we implemented it in Zoom as well, so there are some slight departures, because I rearranged some bits over here, but what I will do is…
Gajinder Singh: I'll go back and sort of also verify in Zoom.
Gajinder Singh: The correctness of this code, and in that way, you know, we have
Gajinder Singh: We will basically have, sort of, one verification, and maybe REAM team can also do it in the meantime.
Gajinder Singh: The second thing… second bit about, Python, …
Gajinder Singh: is that, yeah, so I basically put it together in the sense, but I have not verified that if this will…
Gajinder Singh: if all the syntax… if there are no syntax errors in Python.
Gajinder Singh: But mostly this should work out, and … Yo.
Gajinder Singh: Oh, and June, basically, they… they will… they said that they would be helping me with,
Gajinder Singh: the correctness of the Python.
Gajinder Singh: Syntax, yeah.
Thomas Coratger: Okay, understood. Thanks.
Will Corcoran: Is there anything in containers to review, Azure?
Gajinder Singh: Yeah, container is just this additional structure that was missing over there to add block header, but it's very straightforward.
Will Corcoran: Very cool. That was great. I loved listening to this.
Gajinder Singh: So now, the follow-up to this will be, the folk choice
Gajinder Singh: That, me and O will sort of discuss and… finalize.
Gajinder Singh: And then, I think, the spec-wise, definite zero spec will be done. In DevNet 1, in fact, the spec change would be quite small, because all we did… all we are… we would be adding on top of that would be…
Gajinder Singh: Signatures, and there is more figuring out over there.
Gajinder Singh: then an actual… then basically a very little change on the SDF itself, because, …
Gajinder Singh: So where signature validation is where, you know, things will come up, and we'll introduce validators array in the state, and sort of maintain it a bit. But apart from that, basically, this will very simply translate to
Gajinder Singh: Definite One spec as well.
Will Corcoran: And you had a due date of September 5th for the DevNet spec?
Gajinder Singh: Yeah, so yes, so we can do September 5th by 4 DevNet, one spec, if we can, …
Gajinder Singh: So… so DevNet Zero spec is end of this month. For DevNet 1, we can have the due date of September 5th, so that, you know.
Gajinder Singh: parallel things can be done. And for that, basically, if we can resolve a few questions, regarding
Gajinder Singh: key types, I think that would be good.
Gajinder Singh: So… so that is the only pending thing that I see over there.
Gajinder Singh: Apart from the fact that, okay, you know, what are the exact bytes for signatures and for public key?
Gajinder Singh: So… so those… those are the questions, I think, that are open-ended.
Gajinder Singh: As of now.
Will Corcoran: So, could… could you repeat the questions?
Will Corcoran: the….
Gajinder Singh: ….
Will Corcoran: Public keyer.
Gajinder Singh: Yeah, so…
Gajinder Singh: So the questions, that are… so… so, basically, we need two key types over here, which is basically…
Gajinder Singh: For… which we have also discussed in post-quantum group. So one key type is for attestation, and the other key type is for block signature. And, so…
Gajinder Singh: So these are the two key types that we need. Now, whether we'll have… so what kind of scheme do we have to support these two key types, and going forward, maybe…
Gajinder Singh: other key types that will come for signing other messages, like slashing, etc. So… so these are the… so this is one primary question, that needs to be resolved.
Gajinder Singh: And the second question that, needs to be resolved is what are the exact bytes, because when we say it's 3 KB, so what is the exact byte number, that…
Gajinder Singh: That we can calculate from the params that we have chosen, not only for signature, but also for, for example, public key, that will enroll in the state itself.
Gajinder Singh: So, that was my second question in post-quantum groups, that if publicity for… so basically the root, the Merkel root of,
Gajinder Singh: Of, the SIGH scheme.
Gajinder Singh: So… so what is the size for it? If it's 8 field elements or 7 field elements, okay, we have over here.
unnawut: Yeah, so maybe, maybe while we are on the screen, so this is the PR I just opened this afternoon, basically, changing the current, the current, current container specs, contain only bytes 32 for block signatures and… and vote signatures.
unnawut: What I changed here is to make it more accurately represent, the… the actual signature size using the parameters that I think it was Thomas that, merged the specs in for XMSS.
unnawut: But there's still quite a bit of difference here, so I kind of, like, simplified to just, like, 3 keys here, the path, randomness, and the hashes.
unnawut: But if we go look into, like, the actual XMSS interface that Thomas merged, it's actually… the structure is, right there, right there, actually. The signature, class signature there.
Will Corcoran: Gotcha.
unnawut: Yeah, so the actual signature of, like, the actual structure of the path, the randomness of the ashes is actually a bit more complicated. You have a few inner…
unnawut: inner keys inside these, like, paths and hashes. But I… I chose to omit this because, for depth.0, we are not actually implementing the signature anyway, so having something representing, like… I think this is, like, approximately close enough. I think there's a lot more to discuss about, like, how do we actually represent those
unnawut: like, inner structure inside, like, something that's actually SSC, serializable.
unnawut: So I think that's still to be discussed in the head one.
Gajinder Singh: So, I have, sort of, feedback over here, in the sense that I would not want
Gajinder Singh: a signature container over here, because as such, with regard to clients, basically, you know, this could just be some flat bytes, that can be dealt, and this serialization, deserialization can be dealt inside the signature library as well, because
Gajinder Singh: then basically block signature, which is fixed amount of bytes, and then, aggregated signatures, which are variable amount of bytes. So, basically, the client does not really need to deal with them on the client level. And what we can do is, we can sort of have
Gajinder Singh: basically a non-fixed signature size.
Gajinder Singh: That way, basically, you know, we can just get away from thinking, what is the exact signature size do we need right now? We can say that, okay, you know, we can have a max list
Gajinder Singh: byte list, over here, which basically says that, okay, max 4K byte list.
Gajinder Singh: We can keep for signature.
unnawut: So, Guy Jr.'s proposal is to just, like, maybe flatten the signature container entirely, right? And then maybe just use, like, a vector of…
unnawut: Certain number of bytes, like, 4,000 bytes or something.
unnawut: Is that the proposal?
Gajinder Singh: Yep, that is a proposal.
Gajinder Singh: Otherwise, we'll basically at least need to differentiate between block signature and the aggregated signature.
unnawut: Yeah, I guess, like, for me, that's fine, like, because this is basically just mock signature anyway, so flattened, like, light vectors sounds fine to me. Easier to implement as well, yeah.
unnawut: … I think there was someone else, who also chimed in.
unnawut: I… Okay, maybe, maybe not.
unnawut: So yeah, so this PR is still open in the LeanSpecs repo, so anyone wants to, like, add their thoughts in, feel free to, but I guess, like, I… yeah, I guess, like, a flattened…
unnawut: byte vector is probably easier to implement just for DevNet 0, and then we can discuss the actual structure for DevNet1.
Will Corcoran: Great.
Gajinder Singh: I meant this for DevNet1 because what we were saying was that, can we free specs for DevNet1 by 5th September? And, basically, to do that, we can work for the PRs
Gajinder Singh: on the first week of September for DevNet1 spec, because it's best to close out the spec early on.
Gajinder Singh: And for that, you know, I think even for DevNet1, we should…
Gajinder Singh: Go for, you know, flat bite as well, because client doesn't need to know
Gajinder Singh: the actual internal structure of the signature. And it is good in the sense that, if, for example, signature scheme changes in some way, or the tree height changes in some way.
Gajinder Singh: … Then, basically, client doesn't need to know anything about that.
Will Corcoran: So Gadjinder, this is the last call before…
Will Corcoran: the self-imposed DevNet Zero spec is due, 8.31. Are there any blockers that you want to discuss, or…
Will Corcoran: or O, or anyone else, … There is a…
Will Corcoran: Discussion topics or things that, you know, unknowns that need to be resolved.
Gajinder Singh: Yeah, I think, for DemNet Zero.
Gajinder Singh: There, I don't see any blockers. Oh, what do you think?
unnawut: On the client implementation, I think we are good. …
unnawut: I'm saying this without actually asking the team, but I guess, like, we're good. One of the concerns we had was around the infrastructure for running the DevNets.
unnawut: I… I asked Guillaume yesterday, and it seems like he's taking care of that with ePandaOps, so, basically, like.
unnawut: not doing anything at all, and I think the REAM team is basically just standing by. If there's any help that you'd like, feel free to let us know, but otherwise, like, we are not touching anything on the infrastructure side at all.
Gajinder Singh: But you will say, to make sure that Rheem is Docker compatible.
unnawut: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Guillaume: Yeah, I had a question regarding this, except I just, forgot… oh yeah, weren't you guys supposed to get, DORA to work?
Guillaume: you guys being the RIM team, I got this impression, but if it's not the case, is somebody working on DORA?
Jun: Actually, I was assigned to, handle DORA, but, I'm, not that much progress, is on, so…
Jun: And I'm afraid that current DORA, structure, isn't fit well in our, lean DevNet structure, so, yeah, so I'd like to, …
Jun: I'd like to suggest that, so do we really need DORA at PQ.0 right now?
Gajinder Singh: I think we need at least something like Fort Morne, something like that, so we know that, …
Gajinder Singh: basically, you know, what folks are in the DevNet, and whether The dev… whether, you know.
Gajinder Singh: how many clients are agreeing or not? I think that would be…
Gajinder Singh: Pretty amazing to have, if we can have that, and Fort Moon might be a very simple tool, consider to advertise.
Guillaume: Yeah, Forkman could be… could do the… could be good enough for now. Yeah, this is… I mean, this is not surprising, what you're telling me, Dora is, is a beast. It's a… it's a great piece of software, but unfortunately, it's very… a lot of things are…
Guillaume: beacon chain specific, and I had to deal with it with, with my vertical stuff, just adding a few things. It's, I mean, you have to find your way around, it's, once you know, it's not that hard, but it's, it's a bit, yeah, it's a bit overwhelming.
Guillaume: Yeah, if we can just get Forkman to work, I think it's good enough.
Guillaume: Good question, where is Forkman? I'm pretty sure that's, Holy Man who did this. Okay, if I, if I find it, I will send it to you after this call.
Will Corcoran: Great. Yeah, there was a question earlier in the chat. Camille, you had noted a while back an interest in, having a client participate in the DevNet series. Just curious your current thinking on that, if you're planning to.
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah, we do plan to do this. Yeah, unfortunately, I cannot be super active, as it's basically just two people working on that right now. We're basically finishing up with some, lib2P stuff, so we just finished the QSIP sub integration.
Kamil Salakhiev: And, yeah, integrating all of that stuff into the node itself. So, yeah, there will be basically Cosystem, SSG, and so on.
Kamil Salakhiev: So, yeah, we plan to do this.
Kamil Salakhiev: But, yeah, with… but resources are kind of limited, but yeah.
Kamil Salakhiev: At the targets, it's still there.
Kamil Salakhiev: To implement, yeah.
Gajinder Singh: One question that I had, and I forgot to mention it anyway, was that when we take a hash tree root, or any of the sort of hashing in Poseidon 2, so we are expecting the output as 32 bytes, right?
Gajinder Singh: Of any hashing function that we'll use.
Gajinder Singh: Especially because I don't.
Gajinder Singh: in SOZ.
Gajinder Singh: Toma, I think maybe you might be able to answer this.
Will Corcoran: Kamai, you're muted if you're responding.
Thomas Coratger: Sorry, my screen's frozen. Your question where, like, if I… if the signature outputs are 32 bits, right? Can you repeat your question? Because my….
Gajinder Singh: No, no, my question was that, in SSD, since we are replacing, SHA256 hasher by Poseidon 2, basically.
Gajinder Singh: So… so the output of the hasher remains 32 bytes, right?
Thomas Coratger: We need to check, because these are field elements.
Thomas Coratger: at the output of Poseidon.
Thomas Coratger: So, this is different from SHA. So, we need to check how to do this. I'm not exactly sure how to manage this, but everything in Poseidon are field elements, so basically Koalaber elements.
Thomas Coratger: But, of course, then we can… Transform that into… into bytes.
Gajinder Singh: Yeah, I think this is one of the open questions for DevNet Zero, I guess.
Thomas Coratger: Yep, or….
Gajinder Singh: Or do you think that we should move Poseidon 2 to DevNet 1 and just continue DevNet 0-ishah?
Thomas Coratger: we can do this as well, this is… this is not a problem, like, in any case, like, SHA is also implemented for the signature as well, so…
Thomas Coratger: we could even choose Shah for the signature. This is not a problem. The final choice would be Poseidon, but if this is a broker, then we can go to the Shah route.
Gajinder Singh: Yeah, I guess for now, for SSG, we can just do short of 56, and … the reason to go to Poseidon for that would be to basically make the proving cycles faster.
Gajinder Singh: But then that is something that we can tackle later on.
Thomas Coratger: Exactly, yeah. This is your main objective.
Gajinder Singh: Alright, so I'll just summarize that we have decided to use SHA-256 in SSZ.
Gajinder Singh: Right now, and maybe we'll update it later on, and at some later dev net.
Will Corcoran: Great.
Will Corcoran: … I think that was all that I had on my agenda.
Will Corcoran: Justin, I saw the…
Will Corcoran: the call next Friday is on the multi-sig spec. Is there anything that you wanted to ask for from the group, or if you have everything that you need for that call?
Justin Drake: Nope, I think we're good. I think it's mostly going to be Emil and Toma presenting.
Justin Drake: And it's a fairly self-contained subspec, so all good.
Will Corcoran: Cool.
Will Corcoran: Gail?
Guillaume: Yeah, I have two topics I would like to discuss, hopefully they're super fast.
Guillaume: One of them is just a confirmation. So I talked to PK about the Genesis, PK, or Philip from, from eSpender Ops, about the Genesis generator.
Guillaume: And he was just telling me, you know, I just need a number of… because it's round robin, I just need… I don't need the signatures, the signatures at all, I don't need a tool to dump.
Guillaume: the signatures, I just need to know, the number of, the number of validators, and that will be good enough. Is that still… I just wanted to confirm that this is still the, the picture we have, like, this is still what we want to do for, for the…
Guillaume: the definite zero, because if that's the case, then the tool is more or less ready, and there's no extra work for us to achieve. Yeah, can someone confirm this, or just point me to the right direction so that I can get that to work with Philip?
Gajinder Singh: So, on this, me and O, we agreed that we don't even need a Genesis generator, in the sense that we don't need
Gajinder Singh: Genesis as a Z file, because…
Gajinder Singh: The two config variables that we need for Genesis are GenesisTime and numvalators, and that is something that we can just pick from the config and generate the Genesis on fly inside our clients as itself, so…
Gajinder Singh: In that sense, we don't actually… Genesis Generator even for DevNet1 as well.
Guillaume: Just to….
Gajinder Singh: That's why… why do we even need Genesis Generator on Beacon Genesis? Because…
Gajinder Singh: The Genesis itself is very deterministic and very config-based, so…
Gajinder Singh: In that sense, we actually don't need a Genesis generator anywhere.
Guillaume: Well, we kind of do in a whole kurtosis, system, to use kurtosis.
Guillaume: But it can be just an empty file, or, you know, I mean, we don't have to… it can just be a binary that does nothing, that's fine. Yeah, I just wanted to confirm that we don't need to go through this process of taking in all the transactions to do the genesis, basically, but it seems to be the case, yeah.
Guillaume: The second question is about Grafana, so I have a task.
Guillaume: On my end to, like, like O said before.
Guillaume: I have a task on, task on my side to, to deal with, well, to, to deal with this problem on, along with, with ETH Create Ops. I want to create an issue, so I already asked, people for their GitHub account, so that they can, the GitHub handle, so that they can be, given access.
Guillaume: The question is that of the dashboard. So, from what I understand,
Guillaume: they are… they are going to run the… or DevOps, actually, not ETH, but DevOps is going to run, the Grafana instances, we just need to connect to… connect to it.
Guillaume: I just need to figure out if that thing that Mercy has done
Guillaume: in our current repo is good enough for everybody. So there's a YML file, I'm sorry I'm on mobile, I can't copy-paste it, but, there's a YML file that, corresponds to the graph in a dashboard, and I would want to…
Guillaume: give it to, ETH PrinterOps, or, sorry, to DevOps, actually, and, they can, they can actually, you know, they can run this dashboard. I just want to know if…
Guillaume: this is something we, we have on, you know, just on the Zim side, or if, if Reem would also be interested in,
Guillaume: in adding some things, so… yeah, I just…
Guillaume: basically need Mercy and other people from Rheem to agree on the dashboard and tell me, that this is what, you know, this is what we want.
Guillaume: And, yeah, right, Quadrivium. I haven't really been in contact with them, so if someone can send them my way, because there's also the…
Guillaume: the question of building the image, the Docker image. So, I did this for, for Reem and Zim. Yeah.
Guillaume: I don't have any contact that I can think of at Quadrivium, so… Yeah.
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah, I'm here, you can contact me, … yeah, it's… I don't know.
Guillaume: ….
Kamil Salakhiev: on Telegram.
Guillaume: Yeah, actually, do you know how to find me? Because I have no idea how to… oh yeah, on the PQ test.
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah, okay.
Guillaume: Earthlink.
Kamil Salakhiev: I can, yeah, I'll ping you, I can find anything.
Guillaume: Okay, excellent. Yeah, so I can also help with this, but… Right, so we have this, this format, this dashboard, that I don't want… that I don't want to manage inside the Zoom repository, so we can put it in a different repository if it's Zim-specific, but I think it would make sense to,
Guillaume: To agree on the dashboard thing, and, and we could all, …
Guillaume: yeah, I could go to DevOps and say, hey, this is what we need to build, add those people, run this instance, we're going to send data to it, and …
Guillaume: Yeah, that would be, … soap.
Guillaume: the ball is in every team's court to get back to me on this, so that we can, we can agree, and I can finally create the dashboards.
Will Corcoran: And this is something we want in place for DevNet Zero, correct?
Guillaume: Exactly. Well, and further DevNets, but yes, it's, it's specifically for DevNet Zero.
Will Corcoran: Okay, great.
Will Corcoran: … So, yeah, but… Excellent. I'll…
Will Corcoran: add something to the project board. I don't know if anyone has…
Will Corcoran: immediate thoughts that they want to add to Guillaume's request?
Will Corcoran: Or if you can just go ahead and provide those YAMLs.
unnawut: Yeah, so on the Grafana…
unnawut: REAM has, like, we have our own template, dashboard template right now, but it's very minimal, like, it's only showing the head slots, justified slots, finalized slots, and some metrics, on, like, the time it takes to initialize a block, the time it takes to compute the state route, to process all the votes inside the block, and that's basically it.
unnawut: …
unnawut: So, I think we have some rough idea of what we want to track… what we want to track, but I guess, like, not so sure what's the best format. Like, if you already have, like, a template or something, or a YAML config, something for us to review, I'm happy to review those as well.
Guillaume: I mean, to be fair….
unnawut: So….
Guillaume: Yeah, I'm also not sure what we have, but that's why I say, like, I would like to agree on this so that I can go and create one dashboard. Ultimately, we can have as many dashboards as clients, but it would be nice to be able to
Guillaume: to check, I mean, I don't know, like, for, when we do, forks in, you know, in the EL land, we like to compare how the clients are behaving to make sure there's nothing funky going on with the fork, someone falling off the rails and doing this kind of things.
Guillaume: So, yeah. I mean, okay, now there's an issue, we can, we can agree on what we want, we can, just pull that and see, you know, either the lowest common denominator, but at least get the infrastructure started so that we can,
Guillaume: We can monitor what's going on during the testnet and see if something goes wrong.
Will Corcoran: Great.
Will Corcoran: … Yeah, if…
Will Corcoran: We could kind of go through the rest of these and make sure that we have ownership.
Will Corcoran: Or… the remaining DevNet Zero… critical path tasks, that'd be great.
Will Corcoran: Oh, I think you sort of eyeballed that we're…
Will Corcoran: you know, deficient on assignee needs, is there anything that jumps out at you, or…
Will Corcoran: Do you kick us off?
unnawut: Yeah, so actually, I assigned stuff that I am taking ownership of. The rest, I think, like, some of them probably can be close, right? The…
unnawut: Do you want to do it Genesis state?
unnawut: Oh, I'm not so sure, like, the number 7 there?
Gajinder Singh: Genesis, state issues are mostly Zeeam, owned, but number seven, we… we decided with over that, we don't even need because,
Gajinder Singh: this is just pure config, and clients will be able to just generate a Genesis on the fly. So we can, in fact, close Genesis, this particular…
Gajinder Singh: to generate SSD Genesis.
Gajinder Singh: Yes, so we… we basically need to…
Gajinder Singh: figure out Ethereum Genesis Generator, which basically generates the config files that the clients will be able to use.
Gajinder Singh: to, read the config, and, so there are 3… 3 files. I think they are… so these are the files, I'm not sure now. There are 3 or 4. So, one file is, the config file.
Gajinder Singh: And the second file was Genesis SSD file, but we don't need it anymore.
Gajinder Singh: And the third file I think we need is the peer ENR file.
Gajinder Singh: And, I think this is PRDNRs. I think this is… this is what we need.
Gajinder Singh: So that we can start, … start the clients.
Gajinder Singh: in ketosis.
Gajinder Singh: for DevNet 1, then… we'll have an additional step over here, which will be to generate, …
Gajinder Singh: for example, 100, key pairs, which…
Gajinder Singh: will be used to enroll them in Genesis.
Gajinder Singh: But for DevNet0, that is what we need.
Will Corcoran: Who… who can own this?
Gajinder Singh: This is owned by Guillaume.
Will Corcoran: Jill….
Gajinder Singh: I just….
Will Corcoran: Yeah, I mean, dude.
Guillaume: Yeah.
Guillaume: Yeah, technically it's PK, but yeah, I'm following that.
Will Corcoran: Oh, okay, I'll note that.
Will Corcoran: Okay.
Will Corcoran: ….
Gajinder Singh: And then the… Ethereum package for Kodosys is also owned by Zim. You can assign it to me.
Will Corcoran: Or can set up the Docker Image Builder.
Gajinder Singh: I think, Guillaume is already working on this.
Guillaume: Yeah, it's more… I mean, it's done. It's done except for Quadrivium, but we're… we're looking… we're talking about this, so… Yeah, I think we could, we could close this, and, when, Quadrivium is ready to go, we will add it, it's just a… yeah, it's just a 5-minute flight.
Gajinder Singh: Yeah, so one missing item over there is basically having the CLI to generate the
Gajinder Singh: PQK pairs, so that is…
Gajinder Singh: That is something that we also need to…
Gajinder Singh: to add to Docker Image Builder as well.
Will Corcoran: So I'll close that, or I'll consider it done for now.
Will Corcoran: Plan the reference spec test.
Will Corcoran: Sorry, man.
unnawut: … You put the reference….
Mercy Boma Naps-Nkari: the CLI, is it the same thing that I did?
Mercy Boma Naps-Nkari: Sorry, Gijanda, I wanted to know, this CLI you're talking about, is it the same CLI thing wrapper that I did?
Gajinder Singh: Yes, this is the same CLI which I asked to use, that, you know, generate 100 keys or something like that.
Thomas Coratger: I have that also in mind about the CLI to discuss with Benedict. He's right now on holidays, but to see
Thomas Coratger: as this is something that you will all need as a client, if this is something that we can add to the REST repo.
Thomas Coratger: Of the signature, so that you can just call the CLI from there, and don't have to do that on your own. So, I will check with Benedict once he comes back from holidays. Anyway, I don't have merging rights on this repo, so I need him to check.
Gajinder Singh: So I shouldn't…
Gajinder Singh: client global, so that, you know, we can generate public keys to enroll in the Genesis state. So we need, as global as well as we might need some sort of
Gajinder Singh: Programmatic invocation by the clients, where the clients would write… clients would want to generate private keys.
Gajinder Singh: For some validators based on, you know, whatever is the starting seed.
Gajinder Singh: So, I think both of the forms will be required.
Parthasarathy Ramanujam: Gujan, I'm just wondering, would the key store, the EIP that we are working on, would that make sense here, or rather than having a CLI tool that would generate, this in plain text, which is likely to have issues later?
Parthasarathy Ramanujam: I mean, unlike BLS keys, the key generation of post-quantum is quite time-consuming, and it would be quite expensive if keys are leaked, right? So….
Gajinder Singh: Yeah, I… so, I'm assuming all of these keys start with some particular seat, which is what we will
Gajinder Singh: Yeah. For example, and code in the BLI key store, right? So, in the key store, extended key store.
Gajinder Singh: Yeah. That we basically coordinated on. But I think what we require for DevNet1 purposes is that,
Gajinder Singh: A list of, keys that are gen… a list of public keys that are… that are generated,
Gajinder Singh: For validators, and then, you know.
Gajinder Singh: Either they are sort of referenced to a private, the secret directory, or to the… as well as to the seed.
Gajinder Singh: That, the secret key, the seed that was used for the secret key generation.
Gajinder Singh: So, I think, … That is… that is the only important information that we need right now.
Gajinder Singh: both for Genesis purposes, as well as, you know, client basically reading up,
Gajinder Singh: their assigned, validator IDs and keys, and basically then, you then, initializing their, …
Gajinder Singh: key in memory using, using already pre-generated data file. The pre-generated secret, directory. So…
Gajinder Singh: So I think this would work fine for now, but we should definitely
Gajinder Singh: evolve it, to, to that particular keystore format.
Parthasarathy Ramanujam: All right, let's take up this discussion on the Keystone EIP separately. This is fine for me. Thank you.
Gajinder Singh: Super.
Will Corcoran: It looks… I don't know, seems like the rest of the things that don't have owners right now are…
Will Corcoran: Can be discussed next.
Will Corcoran: Next week, after the spec is done, but…
Will Corcoran: What… from the time that the spec is done to the time that we're launching DevNet Zero, what's the…
Will Corcoran: Anticipated, you know, kind of float date.
Will Corcoran: within there.
Gajinder Singh: So, we were thinking that, you know, …
Gajinder Singh: If the spec is done by end of this month, and…
Gajinder Singh: if we can have… when can we have test cases built on it, I think that would sort of…
Gajinder Singh: Be a critical milestone, because once we have the test cases, then we can check our clients against it.
Will Corcoran: Changing our current, for example, Zim to the current DevNet Zero spec is not hard.
Gajinder Singh: It can be done in a week.
Gajinder Singh: So the question is that, maybe can… when can we get some reference test?
Gajinder Singh: Because then we'll give one week for different tests, and then next week we can… Drive or interop.
Will Corcoran: Great.
Will Corcoran: And then the… Definitely.
Will Corcoran: you know, I tried to create, at the start of this process, like, a ETH PandaOps-esque, DevNet spec, like, one-sheeter. Is this something that…
Will Corcoran: we want to update, you know, going into the, you know, the end of the month, and try to maintain these from DevNet to DevNet? Is there a better process?
Will Corcoran: To be able to capture, like, in a, you know, single index-like format, hey, this is…
Will Corcoran: all the specs that were encapsulated in this DevNet, these are the tests, you know, the success criteria, so on and so forth.
unnawut: I think we can trim a lot of these, for example, like, the top part there about, like, networking and gossip and stuff, I think that's already part of the lean specs.
Will Corcoran: Okay. I guess there's a bit of, like, project management stuff that's, like, in the middle.
unnawut: I think those parts can also become part of the board.
unnawut: …
unnawut: So, I guess overall, I think we can try to kind of, like, split these into their proper places, and…
unnawut: … And closed this one down, I think.
Will Corcoran: Okay.
Will Corcoran: Sounds good.
Will Corcoran: Alright, we're… A minute or two over. Any… Burning thoughts.
Will Corcoran: Alright, great call. Yeah, Gasnender, I really like the format of walking through the spec. That helps me a lot. If people enjoy doing that, I would look forward to,
Will Corcoran: You know, having a section or two that we go through each call, just to kind of help get everyone really familiarized with, not just the details, but, like, you know, the taxonomy of the spec, and, you know, what's where, and…
Will Corcoran: Yeah, I thought it'd be great.
Will Corcoran: Excellent.
Shariq Naiyer: Amazing. See you all.
Gajinder Singh: Yep.
Ladislaus: Thanks, guys. Amazing.
Shariq Naiyer: I mean?